SEID Engine — Social Engineering & Intrusion Detection System

SEID Engine is a machine learning–based system designed to detect social engineering attacks, specifically phishing emails and smishing (SMS-based phishing) messages.
The system combines traditional machine learning techniques with transformer-based natural language models to analyze textual patterns and contextual semantics in digital communications.

The project includes:

A FastAPI backend for model inference

A React + Vite + Tailwind CSS dashboard for user interaction

An ensemble machine learning model combining TF-IDF and RoBERTa

The system enables users to analyze messages in real time and determine their likelihood of being malicious.

Project Overview

Social engineering attacks exploit human behavior rather than software vulnerabilities. Attackers craft deceptive messages that appear legitimate to manipulate users into revealing sensitive information or performing unauthorized actions.

The SEID Engine provides an automated solution to analyze incoming messages and classify them based on the likelihood of phishing or smishing attacks.

The system supports cross-channel analysis, allowing detection across multiple communication platforms such as email and SMS.

System Architecture

The system is composed of three main layers:

Frontend Layer

A React-based dashboard built using Vite and Tailwind CSS provides an interactive interface where users can submit messages for analysis and view prediction results.

Backend Layer

A FastAPI server handles API requests and manages communication between the frontend and the machine learning models.

Machine Learning Layer

The backend loads trained models and performs preprocessing, inference, ensemble scoring, and risk classification.

Machine Learning Models

The SEID Engine uses an ensemble architecture combining two models.

TF-IDF + Logistic Regression

A traditional NLP pipeline that converts text into numerical features using TF-IDF vectorization and classifies messages using Logistic Regression.

Implementation tools:

Scikit-learn

TF-IDF vectorizer

Logistic Regression classifier

Joblib model serialization

RoBERTa Transformer

A deep learning model capable of understanding contextual relationships within text.

Implementation tools:

HuggingFace Transformers

PyTorch

RoBERTa-base architecture

Ensemble Prediction

Predictions from both models are combined using weighted scoring:

final_score = 0.6 × roberta_score + 0.4 × tfidf_score

This improves detection reliability by combining contextual and statistical analysis.

Risk Classification

Prediction probabilities are mapped into risk levels.

Probability	Risk Tier
< 0.2	Low
0.2 – 0.5	Medium
0.5 – 0.8	High
> 0.8	Critical
Security Modes

The system supports configurable detection modes.

Mode	Description
Balanced	General detection performance
High Recall	Reduces missed attacks
Low False Positive	Reduces false alarms
Dataset Sources

The training dataset was constructed by combining multiple publicly available datasets.

Enron Email Dataset

Used as a source of legitimate corporate email messages.

SMS Spam Collection Dataset

Contains SMS messages labeled as spam or legitimate.

Phishing Email Corpora

Datasets containing real phishing campaign messages.

All datasets were converted into a unified canonical format before training.

Data Processing Pipeline

Custom scripts were used to standardize and merge datasets.

process_enron_canonical.py
process_sms_canonical.py
process_phishing_email_canonical.py
build_master_corpus_v2.py

These scripts generate the unified dataset used for model training.

Frontend Dashboard

The user interface was developed using:

React 18

Vite

Tailwind CSS

Axios

Dashboard Features

Message input field

Channel selection (Email / SMS)

Security mode selection

Real-time prediction results

Probability score visualization

Risk tier classification display

The dashboard provides a clean interface for interacting with the detection system.

API Endpoints

The backend exposes REST endpoints used by the frontend dashboard.

Health Check
GET /health

Returns system status and model availability.

Single Message Prediction
POST /predict

Example request:

{
  "text": "Your account has been suspended. Click here to verify.",
  "channel": "email",
  "mode": "balanced"
}

Example response:

{
  "probability": 0.998,
  "risk_tier": "Critical",
  "is_malicious": true
}
Technical Stack
Backend

Python

FastAPI

Uvicorn

Scikit-learn

PyTorch

Transformers

Pandas

NumPy

Joblib

Frontend

React

Vite

Tailwind CSS

Axios

Machine Learning

TF-IDF feature extraction

Logistic Regression

Transformer-based NLP (RoBERTa)

Running the Project
Backend

Install dependencies:

pip install -r requirements.txt

Start the server:

uvicorn app:app --reload
Frontend

Navigate to the frontend directory and install dependencies:

npm install

Start the development server:

npm run dev

The dashboard will be available at:

http://localhost:5173
Project Structure
SEID_ENGINE
│
├── models
│   ├── tfidf_model
│   └── roberta_malicious_classifier
│
├── engine
│   ├── preprocessing.py
│   ├── inference.py
│   ├── ensemble.py
│   └── risk_tiers.py
│
├── frontend
│   └── React + Vite UI
│
├── app.py
├── seid_engine.py
└── requirements.txt
Key Features

Cross-channel phishing detection

Ensemble machine learning architecture

Transformer-based language understanding

Real-time message analysis

Configurable security modes

Interactive web dashboard

Modular and production-ready design

Future Work

Support additional communication platforms

Integrate real-time monitoring systems

Improve visualization and analytics features

Implement continuous model retraining

License

This project is developed for academic and research purposes.
